[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Has anyone ever told you to
stop playing around and start
acting like an adult?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Plato once said,
"you can learn more
about a person in
an hour of play
than any year of conversation."
So there is this mythic
rumor that only children play
and adults work.
But must it be that way?
Or is this simply the
default state, the state
that we've adopted
in our culture?
Because I believe that play
is an optimal way to learn,
to come together as
a society, and also
for loving relationships.
Because imagine a
loving relationship
with absolutely no play.
I believe they're
too intertwined
to remove one from the other.
If fun and play seems to
disappear as we age naturally,
that would mean that
life seems to suck more
as you experience more of it.
That would mean that the
day that you're born,
that's the best it's
ever going to be,
and it's all
downhill from there.
Now come on, does that sound
advantageous for evolution?
Does that sound optimal?
Well, what's the real
importance of play?
Play just might be the
antidote to stress.
And stress nowadays seems
like the number one killer
in the states, as it is
linked with the six leading
causes of death.
But isn't stress just a choice?
That question led
me down a rabbit
hole where I stumbled upon
this man, Stephen Jepsen.
He's the guy that taught
me picking up marbles
and tiny toys with your
toes actually improves
your brain potential.
>> Hello.
I'm Stephen Jepsen.
And I am too young to be 72.
I spend a lot of time training
my balance, stability,
and coordination, in much
the same way that we did
as children on the playground.
And here I am, back
on the playground,
back in the playground again.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I have found a very
basic truth to life.
I believe that we were born
to move, born to be active.
I think a sedentary lifestyle
is death, extremely unhealthy,
and contributes to many of
humanity's modern health
problems, including diabetes,
heart disease, obesity,
depression, dementia,
Alzheimer's, et cetera.
I have a concept that I call
never leave the playground.
There is study
after study and book
after book showing
the importance
of remaining physically active.
I have come up with
some simple and fun
games that will age-proof
one's brain and body.
I guess I'm different.
I do a lot of different things.
And some people might find that
a little bit odd or strange,
but it is served--
it has served me very well.
The games in my program
teach the right and left foot
and right and left
hand new movements.
This contributes
to the generation
of new brain cells, which
is termed as neurogenesis.
The brain is changed
by what I teach,
which contributes
to neuroplasticity.
>> Can you describe some of the
positive changes that occur?
>> Remarkable improvements
in one's balance, stability,
and coordination.
And also, a person's memory
and mood and creativity
are enhanced as a result of
all of this physical activity.
Falling is a tremendous
problem for the elderly.
I begin with very
easy to do movements
that anyone is
able to accomplish.
It's never too late to
start, and the benefits
are extraordinary.
Everything that I do,
it's all positive.
I don't know of any negatives
or downsides with what I do.
>> And Stephen Jepsen plays more
than anyone I know at any age.
It's a beautiful philosophy.
This philosophy is also seen
in Rafe Kelley's movement
modality, which is
evolvemoveplay.com.
Now, Rafe started
as a parkour guy.
If you don't know
what parkour is,
it's a type of "Jungle Book"
kind of running through urban
spaces.
So he took this practice
back into nature
where he believes
that it truly belongs.
I trained with Rafe under
the Golden Gate Bridge.
We practiced climbing trees,
wrestling and grappling,
controlled falls,
and panoramic vision.
But then when I asked
him, why did you
move your practice into nature?
He said, it's healthier.
It feels right.
And that's as simple
as it needed to be.
It feels right.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
What's the importance
of moving in nature?
In 1966, Marian Diamond
took two groups of mice.
One she put in a very
enriched environment
of lots of toys, lots of
levels, and unique spaces
to play around in.
The other group was set
in simply an open box.
Nothing to play with, no
toys, no unique spaces.
She found that those mice
in the enriched environment
had increased glial
cell activation.
That basically means new
brain cells being generated.
They also showed better
cognitive performance simply
from being in a more
enriched environment.
Now truthfully, this means
that play is a form of school.
In fact, animals and children
learn many of their motor,
social, and even
self-confidence building skills
through the act of play.
There are even studies showing
that child development thrives
on play.
This article concludes
play and guided
play offer strong support for
academic and social learning.
In fact, comparisons
of preschools
that use playful child-centered
approaches versus less playful,
more teacher-directed
approaches reveal
that children in the
child-centered approaches
do better in tests of
reading, language, writing,
and mathematics.
And they end off by saying,
more engaging and interesting
environments for children
foster better learning well
into elementary school.
So the science is in,
play is essential in life.
But what is play, truthfully?
Well, play is a lot of things.
Some forms of play are exercise.
But you would never know it.
Some other forms of play
are focus and skill-building
practices.
But you would never know
it, because you're typically
focusing on the fun that
you're having, not the skills
that you're learning.
So I invite you to
take a look at play
as something that is less
of something that we do,
and more of something
that we become.
Because fun just might be an
altered state of consciousness.
Whereas stress brings you
into an agitated state,
drowsiness brings you
into a sleepy state,
fun seems to bring you into a
childlike, unlimited, and less
restricted state
of consciousness,
one that's not bound by the fear
of failure and making mistakes.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
One of the side effects
though of this altered state
of consciousness is laughter.
That thing that just grips
you and takes over your mood,
hijacks how you
feel in the moment.
Milton Berle even said,
laughter is an instant vacation.
Laughter is something that
can hit you from the outside,
or emerge from the inside.
But either way, it's something
that you surrender to,
the hilarious truth
of the here and now.
Now let's take a look at what
a neuropsychologist, Dr. Mario
Martinez, has to say about
the power of laughter
in an episode of "Inspirations"
with Lisa Garr called
Rewriting the Genetic Code.
>> When you're laughing, you
have cardiovascular dilation,
you're increasing
immune function.
All kinds of things
are going on.
But you can't do it
before you feel the hit.
You got to feel the hit.
You got to embody
it, and then allow
yourself to experience it.
>> It's interesting.
I have a 10-year-old, and
we were at her soccer game.
And some of the other parents
get so upset with their kids.
They're 10.
And so sometimes, the
sense of humor gets lost,
and it's being taught
to our kids these days.
>> And if you're too
mechanical about teaching,
then what you're teaching
is to be mechanical,
not the information
that you're teaching.
>> Yeah.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It would seem very obvious
that if you take your life too
seriously, then you're probably
focusing on how you could fail,
how you can mess up, only
focusing on the goal and what
you'd like to get out of life
rather than the enriched moment
of the now.
When you take your
life too seriously,
this could actually lead to
some form of psychological
and even physical illness.
So in this way, laughter
is truly a medicine.
And Dr. Martinez said that you
have to feel the hit first,
then you start laughing.
But some researchers
are finding that even
if you cause your own laughter,
you can still experience
many of those health benefits.
So let's take a look at a series
called "Taking Back the Years".
>> According to
scientific studies,
the body cannot differentiate
between fake and real laughter,
and both have the same
physiological and psychological
benefits.
>> Well, really, it's
about choosing to laugh.
I say we have a key here.
So get your key.
That's your key.
That's called willingness.
And all you have to do
if you want to laugh
is to stick that in your
belly button and turn it.
[LAUGHTER]
Yoga is a very
ancient discipline
of working with the
mind and the body.
And laughter yoga works
with the mind and the body.
So we have attitude adjustments
when we choose to laugh.
Oh, no.
I made a mistake.
[LAUGHTER]
>> So we have attitude
adjustments when we choose
to laugh.
This is really
sounding more and more
like an altered state
of consciousness.
But I assure you,
laughter is not just
some airy fairy or
hippy dippy medicine.
It truly has a measurable
health benefits to it.
So let's take a little bit
deeper of a look at laughter
with a film called
"Nature's Medicine,
from Herbs to Laughter".
>> Their benefits are not
limited to societal factors,
as scientists have found
that laughter generates
physiological changes
that soothe body and mind.
Some laughs later,
the pulse falls,
there is a rise in the levels
of happy hormones known
as endorphins, and more
oxygen reaches the muscles.
The natural immune power
of the body enhances.
Besides, the stress
hormones which
the blood contains diminish.
Hence, laughter is
actually beneficial for us.
But sadly, as adults, we simply
don't have enough laughs.
While children laugh
about 400 times per day,
adults barely manage
to squeeze in one.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Now again, with the being
an adult and less laughs,
less fun.
This truly sounds
like a problem.
But what are the solutions?
As we've seen in this series,
Amy Cuddy, social psychologist,
shows that two minutes
of arms above head
changes your whole
chemistry so you can feel
more confident in the moment.
Smiling in the mirror
changes your chemistry,
so you can actually feel
happier in the moment.
And sure enough, laughing
for a few minutes
changes your
chemistry and puts you
into an altered state to
where you're approaching
the now moment differently.
This is truly one
of the best ways
to hack our emotional state
with the intelligent use
of our body.
Plato said, "our children,
from their earliest years,
must take part in all the
more lawful forms of play.
For if they are not surrounded
with such an atmosphere,
they can never grow up
to be well conducted
and virtuous citizens."
So play is truly
good for society.
But why does it seem so
difficult to introduce play
into our lives as we age?
Why is it so difficult to have
fun in this kind of a rat race
that we seem to live in?
Well, that's the
discipline of it.
This is the path of
our human potential.
It's not going to
be handed to us.
We need to work on it.
It's a challenge that's
beckoning us to meet it halfway
so we can at least engage
with it, learn from it.
Because being able to
endogenously or self-produce
a state of play in the most
unlikely and even difficult
circumstances is truly
a superhuman skill.
But the paradox is,
laughter, and even smiling,
is not appropriate
in all situations.
But rising to the occasion
of the challenge always is.
One of the best ways to enter
into the parts of our mind
that need laughter
the most, we probably
have to at least acknowledge,
if not find beauty,
in the darkness of the mind,
those dark corners that
hold all of our resistance
and all of our fears
in order to start working
on that superhuman skill.
And one of the best ways
to work on this skill
is by starting small.
I suggest turning your daily
chores, the things you'd rather
not be doing, into
an opportunity
to introduce play into
a moment of service.
Take, for instance,
what Alan Watts
has to say about chores
in his essential lectures.
>> The art of washing dishes is
that you only have to wash one
at a time.
If you're doing
it day after day,
you have in your mind's
eye an enormous stack
of filthy dishes, which you
have washed up in years past,
and an enormous stack of filthy
dishes, which you will wash up
in years future.
But if you bring in your mind
to the state of reality which
is, as I've pointed out to you,
only now, this is where we are.
There is only now.
You only have to wash one dish.
It's the only dish you'll
ever have to watch.
This one.
You ignore all the rest.
Because in reality, there is
no past and there is no future.
There is just now.
So you wash this one.
And instead of thinking,
have I got it really clean,
is you turn the cleaning
movement into a dance.
And you dig that.
And you swing that
plate around and you let
the rinsing water go over it.
You put it off in the rack.
Crazy.
See?
Take the next one.
And you get this
rhythm going, see?
And you're not under
compulsion all the time.
>> Now just imagine that.
How Alan Watts was describing
the only dish you're washing
is the one in the moment.
Now expand that out to any other
chore, difficult situations.
Imagine having the skill to
be able to introduce play
into the things that
you never imagined
should have a playful
air about them.
And remember that there's
something about play that
puts you more into the moment,
because the only moment
that truly matters,
like Alan Watts said,
is this one, the one right here.
Now imagine a figure skater
going up for a triple Lutz,
one of the most difficult moves,
and having to land and continue
skating away gracefully.
That's a very
challenging moment.
But what is the best
way to approach it?
It's not by stressing yourself
out trying to overly manage
that situation.
It's a balance between
management and trusting
in the process,
trusting the fact
that you've been here before.
You've done this before.
The really most important
moment is the one
right here and right now.
Now there's this
guy, Marquese Scott,
he became really famous after
he did this viral YouTube video
where he was doing a
robot dance to a Foster
the People's song called
"Pumped Up Kicks",
but the dubstep version.
This went so viral that it
got him on many talk shows
where he got to do
this robot dance.
And people were so
enthralled by the fact
that he had so much
body control, something
that looks so difficult,
but was done so playfully.
So here's my challenge to you.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Turn your chores into
a playful moment.
Clean your house with just
your toes and music on.
Wash the dishes with your
favorite tunes jamming.
Walk through your
house on all fours.
If you're stuck in
traffic, turn that moment
into the challenge
of learning how
to calm your nerves into some
kind of controlled breathing
exercise.
But do something to
introduce a form of play,
a form of, I will
rise to this occasion,
into those moments that
seem very unlikely.
Why?
Because introducing play
into our moments of service
is truly the most
adult thing we can do.
So I'll end off on a quote
from Plato yet again.
He said, "life must
be lived as play."
I hope this episode
has served you well.
And I really hope to
see you next time around
on "Limitless."
[MUSIC PLAYING]